README.md, before:

# FlashString Generator for Ardunio with internationalization and localization

This tool can generate PROGMEM strings from source code and a database with support for translations. It is based on [pcpp](https://pypi.org/project/pcpp/), a pure python C preprocessor.

Instead of writing `PSTR("This is my text!")`, `SPGM(This_is_my_text_)` or `SPGM(This_is_my_text_, "This is my text!"))` is being used. Multiple languages are supported, for example `SPGM(hello_world, "Hello World!", fr_FR: "Bonjour le monde!", de_DE: "Hallo Welt!")`. All strings/translations can be defined directly inside the source code or a centralized header file. The location of definitions and usage is stored as well, to quickly find it in the source code.


<!-- @import "[TOC]" {cmd="toc" depthFrom=1 depthTo=6 orderedList=false} -->

<!-- code_chunk_output -->

- [FlashString Generator for Ardunio with internationalization and localization](#flashstring-generator-for-ardunio-with-internationalization-and-localization)
  - [Change Log](#change-log)
  - [Requirements](#requirements)
  - [Installation](#installation)
    - [Getting the requirements for PIO](#getting-the-requirements-for-pio)
    - [platformio.ini](#platformioini)
    - [Required include directories](#required-include-directories)
    - [Testing the setup](#testing-the-setup)
  - [Basic Usage](#basic-usage)
    - [Syntax](#syntax)
    - [Declaring a PROGMEM string](#declaring-a-progmem-string)
    - [Defining a PROGMEM string statically](#defining-a-progmem-string-statically)
    - [Using a PROGMEM string](#using-a-progmem-string)
    - [Defining a string with (F)SPGM](#defining-a-string-with-fspgm)
    - [Using AUTO_STRING_DEF](#using-auto_string_def)
    - [Modifying automatically created strings](#modifying-automatically-created-strings)
    - [Internationalization and localization](#internationalization-and-localization)
      - [UTF8 encoding and 8 bit data](#utf8-encoding-and-8-bit-data)
      - [Using a different language](#using-a-different-language)
      - [Fallback languages](#fallback-languages)
    - [More examples](#more-examples)
    - [spgm_auto_strings.h](#spgm_auto_stringsh)
  - [Building the example](#building-the-example)
  - [Performance](#performance)
    - [Exclude directories or files](#exclude-directories-or-files)
    - [Preprocess files only if they match a regular expression](#preprocess-files-only-if-they-match-a-regular-expression)

<!-- /code_chunk_output -->


## Change Log

Version 0.1.x is now integrated into for PlatformIO Core

[Change Log v0.1.3](CHANGELOG.md)

## Requirements

- PlatformIO Core 5.x (testd with version 5.1.0)
- Python C Preprocessor, pcpp (tested with version 1.22)

## Installation

PlatformIO Core can be installed with

```bash
pip install platformio
```
or the entire [PlatformIO IDE](https://platformio.org/platformio-ide)

### Getting the requirements for PIO

To install pcpp, run

```bash
pio run -t spgm_install_requirements
```

### platformio.ini

```ini
[env]
lib_deps = ArduinoFlashStringGenerator

extra_scripts =
    pre:.../ArduinoFlashStringGenerator/scripts/spgm_extra_script.py
    post:.../ArduinoFlashStringGenerator/scripts/post_extra_script.py
```

`...` is the location where ArduinoFlashStringGenerator is installed. The configuration options can found in this `platformio.ini`. All variables start with `custom_spgm_generator.`

### Required include directories

Additional include_dirs have to be defined manually. PlatformIO does not provide the include_dirs for the compiler.

Add all include directories to `custom_spgm_generator.include_dirs`

Getting a list for gcc

```bash
$ echo "" | .platformio/packages/toolchain-atmelavr/bin/avr-gcc.exe -E -v -x c++ - -

[...]
#include "..." search starts here:
#include <...> search starts here:
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-atmelavr/bin/../lib/gcc/avr/5.4.0/include
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-atmelavr/bin/../lib/gcc/avr/5.4.0/include-fixed
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-atmelavr/bin/../lib/gcc/avr/5.4.0/../../../../avr/include
End of search list.
[...]

$ echo "" | .platformio/packages/toolchain-xtensa@2.40802.200502/bin/xtensa-lx106-elf-g++.exe -E -v -x c++ -

[...]
include "..." search starts here:
#include <...> search starts here:
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-xtensa@2.40802.200502/bin/../lib/gcc/xtensa-lx106-elf/4.8.2/../../../../xtensa-lx106-elf/include/c++/4.8.2
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-xtensa@2.40802.200502/bin/../lib/gcc/xtensa-lx106-elf/4.8.2/../../../../xtensa-lx106-elf/include/c++/4.8.2/xtensa-lx106-elf
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-xtensa@2.40802.200502/bin/../lib/gcc/xtensa-lx106-elf/4.8.2/../../../../xtensa-lx106-elf/include/c++/4.8.2/backward
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-xtensa@2.40802.200502/bin/../lib/gcc/xtensa-lx106-elf/4.8.2/include
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-xtensa@2.40802.200502/bin/../lib/gcc/xtensa-lx106-elf/4.8.2/include-fixed
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-xtensa@2.40802.200502/bin/../lib/gcc/xtensa-lx106-elf/4.8.2/../../../../xtensa-lx106-elf/include
 [...]

```

### Testing the setup

After a successful setup, the `spgm_*` targets will show up in the list.

```bash
$ pio run --list-targets

Environment    Group     Name                       Title                        Description
-------------  --------  -------------------------  ---------------------------  -----------------------------------------------------
example        Advanced  compiledb                  Compilation Database         Generate compilation database `compile_commands.json`
example        Custom    spgm_build                 build spgm strings
example        Custom    spgm_install_requirements  install requirements         install requirements for SPGM generator
example        Generic   clean                      Clean
example        Platform  bootloader                 Burn Bootloader
example        Platform  fuses                      Set Fuses
example        Platform  size                       Program Size                 Calculate program size
example        Platform  upload                     Upload
example        Platform  uploadeep                  Upload EEPROM
```

## Basic Usage

### Syntax

```cpp
// delcare a string
PROGMEM_STRING_DECL(name);

// define a string statically
PROGMEM_STRING_DECL(name, "Default text")

// define a string
AUTO_STRING_DEF(name, "Default text"[, <language>: "<translation>"[, <language1;language2>: "<translation>"], ...])

// get string as const char *
SPGM(name, "Default text"[, <language>: "<translation>"[, <language1;language2>: "<translation>"], ...])

// get string as const _FlashStringHelper *
FSPGM(name, "Default text"[, <language>: "<translation>"[, <language1;language2>: "<translation>"], ...])

```

### Declaring a PROGMEM string

To use a string defined manually in a different source file, the string must be declared inside the source or a header.

```cpp
PROGMEM_STRING_DECL(name);

PROGMEM_STRING_DECL(This_is_my_text);
```

### Defining a PROGMEM string statically

Defining a string manually can be done with `PROGMEM_STRING_DECL`. Translations are not supported, but the tool will create declarations automatically.

```cpp
PROGMEM_STRING_DECL(name, "Default text");

PROGMEM_STRING_DEF(This_is_my_text, "This is my text");
```

### Using a PROGMEM string

Using a PROGMEM string required to include the header file with the declaration. `FlashStringGeneratorAuto.h` declares all strings and provides two macros for easy access.

```cpp
const char *my_string1 = SPGM(name1);
const __FlashStringHelper *my_string2 = FSPGM(name2);
auto my_string3_1 = FSPGM(name3)
auto my_string3_2 = SPGM(name3)
```

If a name is not defined, the tool will automatically create it and add it to the JSON database. It is marked as `auto` and can be modified later. All `auto` items can be exported and added in bulk as well

### Defining a string with (F)SPGM

A string and its translations can be defined with the (F)SPGM macro as well.

```cpp
Serial.print(FSPGM(hello_word, "Hello World!"));
```

If the same name is defined multiple times, a notice is used while running the tool. Redefining different content causes an error.

### Using AUTO_STRING_DEF

This works like `(F)SPGM` and can be used to store strings in a centralized location. Unlike `PROGMEM_STRING_DECL/PROGMEM_STRING_DEF`, strings are declared and defined during compilation.

Different languages are supported as well.

`AUTO_STRING_DEF` required to be wrapped with `FLASH_STRING_GENERATOR_AUTO_INIT()`

```cpp
FLASH_STRING_GENERATOR_AUTO_INIT(
    AUTO_STRING_DEF(ping_monitor_response, "%d bytes from %s: icmp_seq=%d ttl=%d time=%ld ms")
    AUTO_STRING_DEF(ping_monitor_end_response, "Total answer from %s sent %d recevied %d time %ld ms")
    AUTO_STRING_DEF(CURRENCY, "%.2f", en_US: "$%.2f", ch;es;fr;de;it: "%.2fEUR")
);
```

### Modifying automatically created strings

If a name cannot be found, the tool will create a beautified version of it.

For example: This_is_my_text = "This is my text"

Once the project is compiled with spgm_build enabled, another header file is created that contains `AUTO_STRING_DEF` of all undefined strings to simply add and change them. The default is `custom_spgm_generator.auto_defined_file = $PROJECT_INCLUDE_DIR/spgm_auto_defined.h`

### Internationalization and localization

Besides the "default" translation, it is possible to define different languages. Macros that support translations are `FSPGM`, `SPGM` and `AUTO_STRING_DEF`.

There is no restriction for the language name except that it must be a valid C variable name. Multiple lanuages can be concatenated with `;`.

For example:

`SPGM(CURRENCY, "%.2f", en-US:"$%.2f", en_CA:"CA$%.2f",en_au:"AU$%.2f",de;es;it;fr;ch:"%.2fEUR")`

#### UTF8 encoding and 8 bit data

By default the encoding of the platform/OS is used to read and write files, but strings created are stored as 7 bit ascii and any binary data is hexadecimal encoded.

#### Using a different language

To create PROGMEM strings for a different language, add `custom_spgm_generator.output_language` to the environment.

```ini

[env:my_project]
...

[env:my_project_en]
extends = env:my_project
custom_spgm_generator.output_language = en

[env:my_project_fr]
extends = env:my_project
custom_spgm_generator.output_language = fr*

```

#### Fallback languages

If a translation is missing, the fallback is "default". A list of fallbacks can be added by separating the names with newline or whitespace.

The comparison is case insensitive, `-`and `_` are treated equally and `*` can used as wildcard.

```ini
custom_spgm_generator.output_language--i18n=en-US en-CA en-GB en en-*
```

### More examples

Macros can be used as name or inside the translation.

```cpp
#define TEXT_MACRO "macro"
auto str = SPGM(macro_test, "This is using a " TEXT_MACRO);
```

```cpp
#define VERSION "1.0"
PROGMEM_STRING_DECL(firmware_name, "MyFirmware " VERSION)
```

```cpp
#define MACRO_AS_ID "test_str"
auto str = SPGM(MACRO_AS_ID, "Test String");
```

```cpp
auto str = SPGM(CURRENCY, "%.2f");
```

An example program for Arduino Nano boards is included that uses all options available.

... [example.cpp](src/example.cpp)

### spgm_auto_strings.h

Include this file when using any PROGMEM strings. You can also see where the strings are being used.

```cpp
// src/example.cpp:9 (PROGMEM_STRING_DEF), src/example.cpp:34 (SPGM)
PROGMEM_STRING_DECL(Example1);
// src/example.cpp:10 (PROGMEM_STRING_DEF), src/example.cpp:36 (SPGM)
PROGMEM_STRING_DECL(Example2);
...
```

## Building the example

Adding `custom_spgm_generator.auto_run = always` to the environment will automatically run the SPGM generator during compilation.

Since this slows down the process, it can be deactivated. After every change of the PROGMEM strings, the SPGM generator has to be used once.

Rebuilding/cleaning up the project will execute the SPGM generator during the first compilation using `custom_spgm_generator.auto_run = rebuild`

```bash
pio run -t clean -e example
pio run -e example
```

Set `custom_spgm_generator.auto_run = never` to disable auto run completely and execute the SPGM generator manually by adding the target `spgm_build` to the PIO command.


`pio run -t spgm_build -t buildprog -e example`

or

`pio run -t spgm_build -t upload -e example`

## Performance

Since the preprocessor is python and pretty slow, there are 2 otions to improve performance.

### Exclude directories or files

All files or directories matching the source excludes are not preprocessed, even if included directly.

```ini
custom_spgm_generator.source_excludes =
    ${platformio.packages_dir}/*
    $PROJECT_DIR/.pio/*
```

### Preprocess files only if they match a regular expression

When files are compiled, check the source code for this pattern before preprocessing. This usually gives the best results, but needs to be enabled manually and all macros using the macros in the regular expression, must be added to it.

```ini
custom_spgm_generator.include_pattern = \W(FSPGM|SPGM|AUTO_STRING_DEF|PROGMEM_STRING_DECL|PROGMEM_STRING_DEF)\W
```

Commit message:

database change and tool to create strings from the database

README.md, after:

# FlashString Generator for Ardunio with internationalization and localization

This tool can generate PROGMEM strings from source code and a database with support for translations. It is based on [pcpp](https://pypi.org/project/pcpp/), a pure python C preprocessor.

Instead of writing `PSTR("This is my text!")`, `SPGM(This_is_my_text_)` or `SPGM(This_is_my_text_, "This is my text!"))` is being used. Multiple languages are supported, for example `SPGM(hello_world, "Hello World!", fr_FR: "Bonjour le monde!", de_DE: "Hallo Welt!")`. All strings/translations can be defined directly inside the source code or a centralized header file. The location of definitions and usage is stored as well, to quickly find it in the source code.


<!-- @import "[TOC]" {cmd="toc" depthFrom=1 depthTo=6 orderedList=false} -->

<!-- code_chunk_output -->

- [FlashString Generator for Ardunio with internationalization and localization](#flashstring-generator-for-ardunio-with-internationalization-and-localization)
  - [Change Log](#change-log)
  - [Requirements](#requirements)
  - [Installation](#installation)
    - [Getting the requirements for PIO](#getting-the-requirements-for-pio)
    - [platformio.ini](#platformioini)
    - [Required include directories](#required-include-directories)
    - [Testing the setup](#testing-the-setup)
  - [Basic Usage](#basic-usage)
    - [Syntax](#syntax)
    - [Declaring a PROGMEM string](#declaring-a-progmem-string)
    - [Defining a PROGMEM string statically](#defining-a-progmem-string-statically)
    - [Using a PROGMEM string](#using-a-progmem-string)
    - [Defining a string with (F)SPGM](#defining-a-string-with-fspgm)
    - [Using AUTO_STRING_DEF](#using-auto_string_def)
    - [Modifying automatically created strings](#modifying-automatically-created-strings)
    - [Internationalization and localization](#internationalization-and-localization)
      - [UTF8 encoding and 8 bit data](#utf8-encoding-and-8-bit-data)
      - [Using a different language](#using-a-different-language)
      - [Fallback languages](#fallback-languages)
    - [More examples](#more-examples)
    - [spgm_auto_strings.h](#spgm_auto_stringsh)
  - [Building the example](#building-the-example)
  - [Performance](#performance)
    - [Exclude directories or files](#exclude-directories-or-files)
    - [Preprocess files only if they match a regular expression](#preprocess-files-only-if-they-match-a-regular-expression)

<!-- /code_chunk_output -->


## Change Log

Version 0.1.x is now integrated into for PlatformIO Core

[Change Log v0.1.3](CHANGELOG.md)

## Requirements

- PlatformIO Core 5.x (testd with version 5.1.0)
- Python C Preprocessor, pcpp (tested with version 1.22)

## Installation

PlatformIO Core can be installed with

```bash
pip install platformio
```
or the entire [PlatformIO IDE](https://platformio.org/platformio-ide)

### Getting the requirements for PIO

To install pcpp, run

```bash
pio run -t spgm_install_requirements
```

### platformio.ini

```ini
[env]
lib_deps = ArduinoFlashStringGenerator

extra_scripts =
    pre:.../ArduinoFlashStringGenerator/scripts/spgm_extra_script.py
    post:.../ArduinoFlashStringGenerator/scripts/post_extra_script.py
```

`...` is the location where ArduinoFlashStringGenerator is installed. The configuration options can found in this `platformio.ini`. All variables start with `custom_spgm_generator.`

### Required include directories

Additional include_dirs have to be defined manually. PlatformIO does not provide the include_dirs for the compiler.

Add all include directories to `custom_spgm_generator.include_dirs`

Getting a list for gcc

```bash
$ echo "" | .platformio/packages/toolchain-atmelavr/bin/avr-gcc.exe -E -v -x c++ - -

[...]
#include "..." search starts here:
#include <...> search starts here:
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-atmelavr/bin/../lib/gcc/avr/5.4.0/include
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-atmelavr/bin/../lib/gcc/avr/5.4.0/include-fixed
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-atmelavr/bin/../lib/gcc/avr/5.4.0/../../../../avr/include
End of search list.
[...]

$ echo "" | .platformio/packages/toolchain-xtensa@2.40802.200502/bin/xtensa-lx106-elf-g++.exe -E -v -x c++ -

[...]
include "..." search starts here:
#include <...> search starts here:
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-xtensa@2.40802.200502/bin/../lib/gcc/xtensa-lx106-elf/4.8.2/../../../../xtensa-lx106-elf/include/c++/4.8.2
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-xtensa@2.40802.200502/bin/../lib/gcc/xtensa-lx106-elf/4.8.2/../../../../xtensa-lx106-elf/include/c++/4.8.2/xtensa-lx106-elf
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-xtensa@2.40802.200502/bin/../lib/gcc/xtensa-lx106-elf/4.8.2/../../../../xtensa-lx106-elf/include/c++/4.8.2/backward
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-xtensa@2.40802.200502/bin/../lib/gcc/xtensa-lx106-elf/4.8.2/include
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-xtensa@2.40802.200502/bin/../lib/gcc/xtensa-lx106-elf/4.8.2/include-fixed
 .platformio/packages/toolchain-xtensa@2.40802.200502/bin/../lib/gcc/xtensa-lx106-elf/4.8.2/../../../../xtensa-lx106-elf/include
 [...]

```

### Testing the setup

After a successful setup, the `spgm_*` targets will show up in the list.

```bash
$ pio run --list-targets

Environment    Group     Name                       Title                        Description
-------------  --------  -------------------------  ---------------------------  -----------------------------------------------------
example        Advanced  compiledb                  Compilation Database         Generate compilation database `compile_commands.json`
example        Custom    spgm_build                 build spgm strings
example        Custom    spgm_install_requirements  install requirements         install requirements for SPGM generator
example        Generic   clean                      Clean
example        Platform  bootloader                 Burn Bootloader
example        Platform  fuses                      Set Fuses
example        Platform  size                       Program Size                 Calculate program size
example        Platform  upload                     Upload
example        Platform  uploadeep                  Upload EEPROM
```

## Basic Usage

### Syntax

```cpp
// delcare a string
PROGMEM_STRING_DECL(name);

// define a string statically
PROGMEM_STRING_DECL(name, "Default text")

// define a string
AUTO_STRING_DEF(name, "Default text"[, <language>: "<translation>"[, <language1;language2>: "<translation>"], ...])

// get string as const char *
SPGM(name, "Default text"[, <language>: "<translation>"[, <language1;language2>: "<translation>"], ...])

// get string as const _FlashStringHelper *
FSPGM(name, "Default text"[, <language>: "<translation>"[, <language1;language2>: "<translation>"], ...])

```

### Declaring a PROGMEM string

To use a string defined manually in a different source file, the string must be declared inside the source or a header.

```cpp
PROGMEM_STRING_DECL(name);

PROGMEM_STRING_DECL(This_is_my_text);
```

### Defining a PROGMEM string statically

Defining a string manually can be done with `PROGMEM_STRING_DECL`. Translations are not supported, but the tool will create declarations automatically.

```cpp
PROGMEM_STRING_DECL(name, "Default text");

PROGMEM_STRING_DEF(This_is_my_text, "This is my text");
```

### Using a PROGMEM string

Using a PROGMEM string required to include the header file with the declaration. `FlashStringGeneratorAuto.h` declares all strings and provides two macros for easy access.

```cpp
const char *my_string1 = SPGM(name1);
const __FlashStringHelper *my_string2 = FSPGM(name2);
auto my_string3_1 = FSPGM(name3)
auto my_string3_2 = SPGM(name3)
```

If a name is not defined, the tool will automatically create it and add it to the JSON database. It is marked as `auto` and can be modified later. All `auto` items can be exported and added in bulk as well

### Defining a string with (F)SPGM

A string and its translations can be defined with the (F)SPGM macro as well.

```cpp
Serial.print(FSPGM(hello_word, "Hello World!"));
```

If the same name is defined multiple times, a notice is used while running the tool. Redefining different content causes an error.

### Using AUTO_STRING_DEF

This works like `(F)SPGM` and can be used to store strings in a centralized location and act as a database for all strings. Unlike `PROGMEM_STRING_DECL/PROGMEM_STRING_DEF`, strings are declared and defined during compilation.

Different languages are supported as well. The file should be always included in a header and the source code. It can act as a centralized database.

During compilation the macro is defined as `AUTO_STRING_DEF(name, ...) PROGMEM_STRING_DECL`(name); and if used in header files, pay attention to the linkage. PROGMEM strings are linked as C by default.

```cpp
AUTO_STRING_DEF(ping_monitor_response, "%d bytes from %s: icmp_seq=%d ttl=%d time=%ld ms")
AUTO_STRING_DEF(ping_monitor_end_response, "Total answer from %s sent %d recevied %d time %ld ms")
AUTO_STRING_DEF(CURRENCY, "%.2f", en_US: "$%.2f", ch;es;fr;de;it: "%.2fEUR")
```

### Modifying automatically created strings

If a name cannot be found, the tool will create a beautified version of it.

For example: This_is_my_text = "This is my text"

Once the project is compiled with spgm_build enabled, another header file is created that contains `AUTO_STRING_DEF` of all undefined strings to simply add and change them. The default is `custom_spgm_generator.auto_defined_file = $PROJECT_INCLUDE_DIR/spgm_auto_defined.h`

### Internationalization and localization

Besides the "default" translation, it is possible to define different languages. Macros that support translations are `FSPGM`, `SPGM` and `AUTO_STRING_DEF`.

There is no restriction for the language name except that it must be a valid C variable name. Multiple lanuages can be concatenated with `;`.

For example:

`SPGM(CURRENCY, "%.2f", en-US:"$%.2f", en_CA:"CA$%.2f",en_au:"AU$%.2f",de;es;it;fr;ch:"%.2fEUR")`

#### UTF8 encoding and 8 bit data

By default the encoding of the platform/OS is used to read and write files, but strings created are stored as 7 bit ascii and any binary data is hexadecimal encoded.

#### Using a different language

To create PROGMEM strings for a different language, add `custom_spgm_generator.output_language` to the environment.

```ini

[env:my_project]
...

[env:my_project_en]
extends = env:my_project
custom_spgm_generator.output_language = en

[env:my_project_fr]
extends = env:my_project
custom_spgm_generator.output_language = fr*

```

#### Fallback languages

If a translation is missing, the fallback is "default". A list of fallbacks can be added by separating the names with newline or whitespace.

The comparison is case insensitive, `-`and `_` are treated equally and `*` can used as wildcard.

```ini
custom_spgm_generator.output_language--i18n=en-US en-CA en-GB en en-*
```

### More examples

Macros can be used as name or inside the translation.

```cpp
#define TEXT_MACRO "macro"
auto str = SPGM(macro_test, "This is using a " TEXT_MACRO);
```

```cpp
#define VERSION "1.0"
PROGMEM_STRING_DECL(firmware_name, "MyFirmware " VERSION)
```

```cpp
#define MACRO_AS_ID "test_str"
auto str = SPGM(MACRO_AS_ID, "Test String");
```

```cpp
auto str = SPGM(CURRENCY, "%.2f");
```

An example program for Arduino Nano boards is included that uses all options available.

... [example.cpp](src/example.cpp)

### spgm_auto_strings.h

Include this file when using any PROGMEM strings. You can also see where the strings are being used.

```cpp
// src/example.cpp:9 (PROGMEM_STRING_DEF), src/example.cpp:34 (SPGM)
PROGMEM_STRING_DECL(Example1);
// src/example.cpp:10 (PROGMEM_STRING_DEF), src/example.cpp:36 (SPGM)
PROGMEM_STRING_DECL(Example2);
...
```

## Building the example

Adding `custom_spgm_generator.auto_run = always` to the environment will automatically run the SPGM generator during compilation.

Since this slows down the process, it can be deactivated. After every change of the PROGMEM strings, the SPGM generator has to be used once.

Rebuilding/cleaning up the project will execute the SPGM generator during the first compilation using `custom_spgm_generator.auto_run = rebuild`

```bash
pio run -t clean -e example
pio run -e example
```

Set `custom_spgm_generator.auto_run = never` to disable auto run completely and execute the SPGM generator manually by adding the target `spgm_build` to the PIO command.


`pio run -t spgm_build -t buildprog -e example`

or

`pio run -t spgm_build -t upload -e example`

## Performance

Since the preprocessor is python and pretty slow, there are 2 otions to improve performance.

### Exclude directories or files

All files or directories matching the source excludes are not preprocessed, even if included directly.

```ini
custom_spgm_generator.source_excludes =
    ${platformio.packages_dir}/*
    $PROJECT_DIR/.pio/*
```

### Preprocess files only if they match a regular expression

When files are compiled, check the source code for this pattern before preprocessing. This usually gives the best results, but needs to be enabled manually and all macros using the macros in the regular expression, must be added to it.

```ini
custom_spgm_generator.include_pattern = '.*[\W\S](FSPGM|SPGM|AUTO_STRING_DEF|PROGMEM_STRING_DECL|PROGMEM_STRING_DEF)[\W\S]'
```
